The Differences between Prāsaṅgika and Svātantrika Madhyamaka There are a considerable number of differences between the two Madhyamaka schools, the Consequentialists and the Autonomists. Roughly speaking, these may be seen in explanations of the meaning of the following verse from the Root of Wisdom: There exists no arising of an entity, Anytime or anywhere, From itself, from another, From both, or without a cause. The Consequentialists teach four theses on the impossibility of four aspects, namely, any entity, anywhere or anytime, arising from itself, and so forth. Having taught these, they negate their four opposites, such as an entity arising from itself and so forth, primarily by indicating the consequences. They maintain that since cognition realizing the nonarising is engendered from this, there is no need to present autonomous reason, apart from the consequences, to engender valid cognition in others' minds realizing nonarising. The Autonomists maintain that after having initially refuted the four mistaken concepts, such as an entity arising from itself and so forth, one must present reasons that establish the entity as nonarising. This is the main difference. Moreover, the Consequentialists do not accept an entity arising from another even on a conventional level. Although a sprout arises from a seed on a conventional level, they maintain that the sprout is not different from the seed. Furthermore, they maintain that at the time of being a seed, the sprout has not yet arisen, and at the time of being a sprout, the seed does not exist, having ceased. The Autonomists accept the entity arising from another on a conventional level, because they maintain that the sprout arises from the seed and that the sprout is different from the seed. Additionally, the Consequentialists maintain that even valid cognition is deceptive, since all compounded phenomena are deceptive. The Autonomists do not accept this. With regard to a definitive enumeration, the Autonomists accept two, namely, perception and inference. The Consequentialists accept four, adding inference through analogy and inference through scripture. The Consequentialists maintain that śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas realize the non-essentiality of phenomena, that meditative equipoise is without appearance, and that at the level of buddhahood there are no mental factors, as mind and mental factors are contrary to buddhahood. These are not accepted by the Autonomists and many others. With regard to the particulars advocated by the Sūtra school, they are functioning entities and synonymous with impermanence, essentially including all phenomena conditioned by causes and conditions (for example, pillars, vases, and so forth). Universals are inefficacious phenomena, being synonymous with permanence, including all unconditioned phenomena that do not arise from causes and conditions (for example, space and so forth). 
